# falco2
A revision of falco

# No documentation

Running `falco2` should show you the options and they are self-explanatory.  It
will run with fastq, gzip fastq, bgzip fastq, BAM and SAM input.

# Quick start

If you are willing to use binaries generated by a GitHub action, "universal"
binaries are available for linux and macos in the actions tab, under summary for
the corresponding workflows.

# Building

A compiler that can do c++23 is needed, for example GCC >= 14.2.0, along with
cmake. It builds on Linux. It builds on macOS using GCC as obtained through
Homebrew, but using apple-clang, it seems to require macOS/Xcode 26.2.

Dependencies:
- ZLib: which is likely already installed on your system
- HTSLib: for handling BAM, SAM and BGZF files
- Libdeflate: to make HTSLib faster. This is not strictly needed, for example if
  you use an HTSLib that wasn't built to use it.

From the root of the repo:
```
cmake -B build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
cmake --build build -j8
```
Then `falco2` will be in the `build` directory.

# Note about threads

The following results categories can be impacted by thread use:

- Tile quality scores: The reads used to make estimates about tile qualities can
  differ depending on the number of threads used. The trends should not change
  and the magnitude of any differences should be small unless the data is very
  small.

- Kmer counts: Similar to tile quality scores, the identities of reads used for
  kmer statistics will differ depending on the number of threads used. The
  number of reads used for this analysis will not change.

# What's not yet working

- `fastqc_data.txt` slightly differs on tiles (seems to be arbitrary) and in GC
  content histogram, which I'm not sure I want to directly replicate.
- Use of threads means that the "Duplication levels" are very hard to replicate
  exactly, though that might not matter very much.
- Counting duplicate reads truncates at 50nt, where previously anything above
  75nt was truncated to 50, while reads of length [51, 75] were left as their
  original length, which was a bit unusual.
- There is no `summary.txt` output file yet. The info is contained in the
  `fastqc_data.txt` (the only output file).
- There is no HTML formatting of the output.
